English 1102- Analysis of Hamlet
 
Hamlet has fascinated audiences and readers for centuries, and the first thing to point out about him is that he is 
enigmatic. There is a
lways more to him than the other characters in the 
play
!
 can figure out; even 
The most careful and clever readers come away wit
h the sense that they don’t know 
everything 
 
There is to know about this character. Hamlet 
Actually tells other characters that there i
s more to
 him 
than meets the eye—notably, his mother, and 
rosencrantz 
and Guildenstern—but his fascination involves much more than this. When he s
peaks, he sounds as if there’s something im
portant he’s not saying, maybe something 
even he is not aware of. The ability to write soliloquies and 
dialogues
 that create this effect is one of Shakespeare’s 
most impressive achievements. A university student whose studies are interrupted by his father’s death, Hamlet is 
extremely
 philosophical and contemplative. He 
is particularly drawn to difficult questions or questions that can
not be answered with any certainty. 
 Faced with evidence 
that 
his uncle murdered h
is father, evidence that any other character in a play would believe, Hamlet becomes ob
sessed
 with proving his uncle’s guilt before trying to a
ct. The standard 
of “beyond a reasonable doubt” is simply unacceptable to hi
m. He is equally 
plagued with questions about the afterlife, abo
ut 
the wisdom of suicide, about what happens to bodies after they die—the list is 
extensive. But even though he is thoughtful to the point of obsession, Hamlet also behaves 
rashly 
 
and impulsively. When he does act, it is with surprising swiftness and little or 
no premeditation, as when he stabs Polonius through a curtain without even checking to see who he is. He seems to step very easily into the role of a ma
dman, behaving
 erratically and upsetting the other characters with his wild speech and pointed 
Innuendos.It is also important 
 to note that Hamlet is extremely melan
choly 
and discontented with the state of affairs in De
nmark and in his own family—indeed, in the world at large. He
's extremely disappointed with his mo
ther for
 marrying his uncle so quickly, and he repudiates Ophelia, a woman he once claimed to love, in the harshest terms. His words often indicate his dis
gust with and distrust of wom
en in general. A
t
 a number of p
oints in the play. B
ut, despite all of the 
things with which Hamlet professes dissatisfaction.
!